---
layout: post
title:  "On the evolution of pyrethroid target-site resistance"
date:   2021-02-16
categories: insecticide resistance
---

*Tl;DR there are multiple double- and triple-mutant combinations in
the Vgsc gene which I think we should be more concerned about. Also,
they are evolving in different ways.*

We recently published a new analysis of insecticide resistance using
data from the *Anopheles gambiae* 1000 Genomes Project (Ag1000G):

* [Clarkson et al. (2021) The genetic architecture of target‐site
  resistance to pyrethroid insecticides in the African malaria vectors
  *Anopheles gambiae* and *Anopheles
  coluzzii*.](https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.15845)

I wanted to highlight here just one point from the paper, about
double- and triple-mutants. To help make sense of it, let me first
rewind and give a little context.


## Pyrethroid target-site resistance in *Anopheles gambiae*

Malaria control relies heavily on insecticide-treated bednets
(ITNs). All ITNs use a pyrethroid insecticide. Pyrethroids work by
binding to a mosquito nervous system protein called the voltage-gated
sodium channel. Malaria mosquitoes can become resistant to pyrethroid
insecticides via genetic changes in the *Vgsc* gene which encodes this
protein. This is known as pyrethroid target-site resistance.

The first pyrethroid target-site resistance mutation found in
*Anopheles gambiae* was a leucine to phenylalanine substitution at
position 995 in the protein, L995F ([Martinez-Torres et
al. 1998](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9535162/)). Shortly after, a
different substitution was found at the same position in the protein,
L995S ([Ranson et
al. 2000](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11029667/)). A decade later,
a third mutation -- N1570Y -- was found ([Jones et
al. 2012](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1201475109)). N1570Y was never
found by itself, only in combination with L995F, as a double-mutant.

(Side note: many papers number these mutations according to their
position in the house fly protein sequence. In the house fly, these
mutations are numbered L1014F, L1014S and N1575Y.)

[Wang et
al. (2015)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4352587/)
then showed experimentally that both L995F and L995S cause pyrethroid
resistance, and N1570Y by itself does not cause any resistance at all,
but the double-mutant L995F+N1570Y is much more potent. For example,
compared to the normal protein, L995F is 8-fold more resistant to
permethrin, but L995F+N1570Y is 80-fold more resistant. How exactly
this works at the molecular level is something of a mystery, as N1570Y
is within an intracellular loop of the protein and cannot affect
pyrethroid binding directly. But the VGSC protein is an intricate and
complex molecular machine with many moving parts. Wang et
al. suggested that N1570Y could induce a small but important change to
the shape (conformation) of a segment of the protein, enhancing the
effect of L995F.

The important point here is that the double mutant L995F+N1570Y is
highly resistant to pyrethroids. The degree of resistance is
potentially important because a pyrethroid-treated ITN might still
kill a mosquito with mild resistance, but a highly resistant mosquito
might survive and tolerate the insecticide, enabling it to feed and
spread malaria. Exactly how resistant a mosquito needs to be before
ITNs stop being effective is a matter for some debate. But
nevertheless, highly resistant mosquitoes are cause for concern.


## *Vgsc* double- and triple-mutants

Until our study, these were the only three resistance mutations
studied in *Anopheles gambiae* mosquitoes. But pyrethroid resistance
is a problem in lots of other insect species, including other
mosquitoes that transmit disease, as well as a slew of agricultural
pests. The *Vgsc* gene is common to all insects, and a whole carnival
of other resistance mutations had been found in this gene in these
other pest species, reviewed in [Dong et
al. (2014)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4484874/). We
wondered if there might be other mutations in malaria mosquitoes that
had previously been missed, because most previous studies did not
sequence the full length of the gene.

We used [data from whole-genome sequencing of mosquitoes from 13
African countries](https://www.malariagen.net/resource/27) to survey
the full *Vgsc* gene for nucleotide variants that could alter the
protein sequence. As expected, L995F and L995S were at high frequency
in many populations, confirming a central role for these two
mutations. The double-mutant L995F+N1570Y was also present in several
mosquito populations. But we also found another 20 protein-altering
mutations at appreciable frequency in one or more populations. What is
more, these mutations occurred in distinct combinations:

* L995S
* L995F
* L995F+R254K
* L995F+D466H+I1940T
* L995F+T791M+A1746S
* L995F+V1507I
* L995F+N1570Y
* L995F+E1597G
* L995F+K1603T
* L995F+V1853I
* L995F+I1868T
* L995F+P1874S
* L995F+P1874L
* L995F+A1934V
* V402L+I1527T

I think all of the above double- and triple-mutants are cause for
concern, because they potentially confer a high degree of pyrethroid
resistance. There is no direct experimental evidence for this yet in
*Anopheles gambiae* mosquitoes, other than what is known about the
L995F+N1570Y, but consider the following.

Firstly, V402L+I1527T is concerning because V402L by itself is known
to cause pyrethroid resistance in other insects, and I1527T occurs
immediately adjacent to a pyrethroid binding site. We found this
combination at up to 15% frequency in West African *An. coluzzii*
populations, but our sampling of these countries was all done in 2012,
and we don't know what has happened since. We need more recent samples
to determine whether this variant is increasing or decreasing in
frequency. If it is increasing, then that would be further cause for
concern, because that would mean it is out-competing L995F
combinations which are also found in those populations.

Secondly, *Vgsc* is a highly conserved gene, under strong functional
constraint. Aside from the V402L+I1527T combination, and the mutations
found in combination with L995F, there are hardly any other mutations
at appreciable frequency. In other words, *Vgsc* is not the kind of
gene where mutations get to high frequency by chance. The fact that so
many mutations are found exclusively in combination with L995F is a
strong hint that, like N1570Y, they are somehow enhancing pyrethroid
resistance, and thus under selection.

We need to be monitoring all of these mutations. And we need to know
more about their resistance phenotype.


## Evolutionary trajectories

One final thought. There are three distinct evolutionary trajectories
here. I find that interesting.

Consider L995S. By itself it confers pyrethroid resistance, and is
under strong positive selection. But there are essentially no double-
or triple-mutant combinations involving this mutation. In other words,
it's an evolutionary dead end. Why?

Now consider L995F. By itself it confers pyrethroid resistance, and we
also find it together with a jamboree of other substitutions. For some
reason, L995F (plus selection for pyrethroid resistance) unlocks a
rich new landscape of evolutionary possibilities. Again, why?

Finally, consider V402L+I1527T. We essentially only ever find these
mutations together, hardly ever by themselves. They really need each
other. Each by itself may be somewhat deleterious, but they really
work well together. Here, there is a trough in the evolutionary
landscape that needs to be crossed or leaped somehow. We know from
other systems (e.g., COVID-19) that such evolutionary leaps can happen
in general, but what are the specific circumstances in malaria vectors
that make that possible?

Much yet here to be unravelled.