---
layout: post
title: Kigali, September 2022
---

Conference trips are a wonderful opportunity for reflection. They take
you out of the daily grind, temporarily break you free of meetings,
deadlines, deliverables, emails. Travel and transit give you time and
space, moments where all you can do is sit still and allow yourself to
be transported from one place to another. Looking down at the Earth's
surface from 40,000 feet, watching the drama and collision of
landscape and humanity from a distance, rekindles your sense of
perspective. And arriving in an unfamiliar place where differences in
food, clothes, language and cultural norms, even if only subtle, all
help to burst the bubble of ordinary life.

Conferences themselves are always energising. Meeting new people,
absorbing new ideas, feeling new influences, glimpsing new
opportunities and challenges. Before long the mind inevitably hits
overload, which then interacts with an overabundance of coffee and
alcohol and a deficit of sleep to create a heightened state of
consciousness where anything seems possible. If you're fortunate, a
friendly conference veteran will recognise the look in your eyes and
take you out for a walk or a run to help you reset and refresh, ready
for more inputs.

The last two and a half years have been difficult. Securities I had
taken for granted for more than a decade cracked and crumbled. Both at
work and at home I hit a series of unfamiliar challenges which often
felt insurmountable simply because I was at sea in uncharted waters
with no compass for navigation. And everywhere I turn it seems like
people I know are in a similar boat, fighting to weather their own
storm, struggling to cope with extreme winds and irregular waves from
multiple directions.

The [Pan-African Mosquito Control Association (PAMCA) conference in
September 2022](https://conference2022.pamca.org/) was my first
conference after the pandemic. Held in Kigali, Rwanda, it brought
everything I could ask for in a conference and more. Over and above
the usual conference experience, there was a marvellous sense of
reunion, of seeing friends again for the first time in 3 or more
years. And the spirit of the conference is so strong, everyone shares
a common purpose and is ready to celebrate each others'
achievements. Mix in a generous portion of African hospitality,
colour, music and fun, and you're there.

Outside of the conference, two other experiences left their mark.

The first was an invitation to a fund-raising dinner at [Maison
Shalom](https://maisonshalom.org/), a charity supporting Burundian
refugees. My ignorance of history and culture knows no bounds, and I
knew next to nothing about the number of Burundian refugees currently
in Rwanda. I got to visit the site of a new school being built for
refugee children, and hear the story of strength and determination
that forged the charity out of unimaginable sorrow. All of us in
attendance had been invited by a Burundian colleague with a personal
connection to the charity, and with characteristic humility and humour
he shared his story with us and made us all feel connected.

The second was a visit to the Genocide Memorial in Kigali. I tried not
to lose myself in the horror but learn as much as I could about the
circumstances that led to the genocide. Afterwards I picked up a copy
of "Shaking Hands with the Devil", an account of the genocide written
by the commander of the UN peacekeeping force deployed in Rwanda at
the time. Both the memorial and the book confront you with the brutal
reality of what as people we are capable of, but also of where our
values as an international society truly are. I think this blew away
the remaining cobwebs of idealism still lingering from my youth.

But the visit to the memorial also gave me a gift, and that gift was a
word: ubumuntu. Ubumuntu is a Kinyarwandan word translating roughly as
"kindness", "generosity" or "greatness of heart". It is the word
chosen to name a [programme of education](https://ubumuntu.rw/) to
promote peace in Rwanda following the genocide. It is also the name
chosen for [a
documentary](https://genocidearchiverwanda.org.rw/index.php/Ubumuntu)
about people who risked their lives to save others during the
genocide. Ubumuntu is called "ubuntu" in some other African languages,
and I knew this word already of course because it is the name of the
operating system on my computer. I had some sense of what ubuntu meant
before, but as ubumuntu it now has a new meaning.

Returning home, I was of course delighted to see my family again, but
also confronted with the reality that life's challenges had only been
put on pause, and had been patiently waiting for my return. But the
experience of Kigali stays with me, and gives me resolve to perhaps
step outside the safety of the familiar, to be a little bolder. And
whatever comes next, whatever new waters I venture into, I will have a
new guide.
