---
layout: post
title: A vintage year for African malaria vector genomics 
description: "Scientific highlights from 2024."
---

Many long labours came to fruition in 2024. Collaborative efforts to
collect and sequence samples, build data resources and analytical
tools, train and support students and scientists, all converged to
produce a bumper crop of new research papers on African *Anopheles*
genomics. These papers have redefined our understanding of major
malaria vector species and how they are evolving. 

Clara Rehmann et al. published [Evaluating evidence for co-geography
in the *Anopheles–Plasmodium* host–parasite
system](https://doi.org/10.1093/g3journal/jkae008).

Luna Kamua et al. published [The *Anopheles coluzzii* range extends
into Kenya: detection, insecticide resistance profiles and population
genetic structure in relation to conspecific populations in West and
Central Africa](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-024-04950-x).

Andrzej Pastusiak et al. published [A metagenomic analysis of the
phase 2 *Anopheles gambiae* 1000 genomes dataset reveals a wide
diversity of cobionts associated with field collected
mosquitoes](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06337-9).

Sanjay Nagi et al. published [Parallel evolution in mosquito vectors -
a duplicated esterase locus is associated with resistance to
pirimiphos-methyl in *Anopheles
gambiae*](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msae140).

Jorge Amaya Romero et al. published [Mitochondrial variation in
*Anopheles gambiae* and *Anopheles coluzzii*: phylogeographic legacy
and mitonuclear associations with metabolic resistance to pathogens
and insecticides](https://doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evae172).

Rob McCann et al. posted the preprint [Variation in spatial population
structure in the *Anopheles gambiae* species
complex](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.26.595955).

Beniamino Caputo et al. published [Population genomic evidence of a
putative ‘far-west’ African cryptic taxon in the *Anopheles gambiae*
complex](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06809-y).

Mahamadi Kientega et al. published [Whole-genome sequencing of major
malaria vectors reveals the evolution of new insecticide resistance
variants in a longitudinal study in Burkina
Faso](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936-024-05106-7).

Tristan Dennis et al. published [Cryptic population structure and
insecticide resistance in *Anopheles gambiae* from the southern
Democratic Republic of
Congo](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-70885-7).

Naomi Dyer et al. published [Mechanisms of transcriptional regulation
in *Anopheles gambiae* revealed by allele-specific
expression](Mechanisms of transcriptional regulation in Anopheles
gambiae revealed by allele-specific expression).

Joel Odero et al. published [Discovery of knock-down resistance in the
major African malaria vector *Anopheles
funestus*](https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.17542).

Sophia Mwinyi et al. posted the preprint [Genomic analysis reveals a
new cryptic taxon of malaria vectors with a distinct insecticide
resistance profile in the coast of East
Africa](https://doi.org/10.22541/au.173090555.57059009/v1).

Brian Polo et al. posted the preprint [Genomic surveillance reveals
geographical heterogeneity and differences in known and novel
insecticide resistance mechanisms in Anopheles arabiensis across
Kenya](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-5328087/v1).

Eric Lucas et al. published [Copy number variants underlie major
selective sweeps in insecticide resistance genes in *Anopheles
arabiensis*](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002898).

Rounding off the year in style, Marilou Bodde and Joachim Nwezeobi
posted the preprint [Genomic diversity of the African malaria vector
*Anopheles funestus*](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.14.628470).

All of these studies made use of or generously contributed data to the
[Malaria Vector Genome Observatory](https://malariagen.net/vobs).

I know there are a lot more great papers in the works from these and
other groups, so I'm looking forward to 2025, Happy New Year!